Germany denies supplying Israel with
weapons of war yet it's one of the
staunchest supporters of Israel's war on
Gaza what's behind Germany's position
and what are the long-term consequences
for its diplomacy in the Middle East
this is Inside
[Music]
Story
hello there and welcome to the program
I'm Laura Kyle 80 years after the
Holocaust Germany is accused of being
complicit in Israeli genocide in Gaza
Nicaragua wants the international court
of justice to order Berlin to stop
military exports to Israel German
lawyers have rejected the case as
baseless and biased they say Berlin is a
fierce advocate for international
humanitarian law but at the same time
for years Germany has declared the
security of the state of Israel is at
its core of a foreign policy it's very
rais in debt that's World opinion turns
against Israel's brutal war on Gaza
where does that leave Berlin's
unwavering support for the Jewish people
we'll discuss all this with our panel of
guests in just a moment but first this
report from Alexandra
bers when Germany appeared before the
un's top Court accused of facilitating
Israeli genocide in Gaza its defense
Drew squarely on National History it had
learned from its past lawyers argued it
had learned from the Holocaust Germany
is doing its utmost to live up to its
responsibility Isa both the Israeli and
the Palestinian people this explains one
of the principles upon which our foreign
policy with regard to all Middle East
issues
rests our history is the reason why
Israel's security has been at the core
of German foreign policy the need to
atone for the killing of 6 million Jews
during the second world war has made
supporting Israel a historic Duty for
Berlin it's even described as a reason
for
existence at this moment Germany has
only one place and that is alongside
Israel this is what we mean when we say
the security of Israel is Germany's res
[Applause]
on own history our responsibility
stemming from the Holocaust makes it our
Everlasting duty to stand up for the
Existence and the safety of the state of
Israel Schulz was the first foreign head
of state to visit Israel after the
October 7th attacks by Hamas Germany is
the second largest armed supplier to
Israel after the United States it's
abstained from multiple un votes calling
for a ceasefire in Gaza and intervened
in defense of Israel against South
Africa's charges of genocide at the hag
but the mounting death toll in Gaza has
put Germany Under Pressure forcing it to
question its unwavering support on
recent visits to Israel the foreign
minister noted the survival of
Palestinians is just as important as
Israel's National
securitya the humanitarian situation in
Gaza is Hell the fact that we're stuck
in this dilemma must not come at the
expense of gaza's hungry civilian
population within Germany police have
clamped down on protests in support of
Palestine and the country officially
defines any appearance of hatred towards
Israel as anti-Semitism
free but opinion polls conducted by
public broadcasters in March suggest
nearly 70% of Germans believe Israel's
military actions in Gaza are not
justified up from 50% just a few weeks
before
Alexandra buers Al jazer for Inside
Story well let's bring in our guests now
and joining us from Berlin is tobas
Baker a member of the German Parliament
for Alliance 90 the greens and a
political scientist in Washington DC is
John cner an author and journalist who's
a senior associate fellow at the Royal
United Services Institute and in the
German city of stutgart is sh he
director of The Alliance For Justice
between Israelis and and Palestinians he
tracks the arms trade between Germany
and Israel a very warm welcome to all of
you Tobias let's start with you what's
your response uh as a member of the
German government to Nicaragua's
accusation at the international court of
justice that Germany is complicit in the
genocide of
Palestinians well um as a member of
parliament I of course argue that we
have to take any accusations that is uh
brought up in front of the international
court of justice in front of the icj uh
quite serious but when it comes to to
the details uh I do argue as well that
um most of what's been brought up um I
would rather say is probably based on on
a
misunderstanding um and uh that this
does not really hold the
accusations um and I think the the the
the presentation by our government
yesterday yesterday in the court U made
clear that we are taking our
responsibility in terms of humanitarian
assistance very serious um but also our
um well well when it comes to to how we
control arm exports Etc that this is uh
very well controlled um but still of
course you need to take it serious it is
after all a a hze in front of the icj um
but I am pretty much uh sure that um
there there is a clear path where this
is going to go if I could just dig into
that a little bit to B what exactly was
misunderstood I I think mainly when it
comes to the humanitarian Aid and the uh
which is often perceived and and our
reaction to to the the the facts or the
the Israelis brought up that certain
members of unur were involved in the
terroristic attacks of the 7th of
October and uh after that
we decided that there is not not going
to be any new funding for unra from
Germany but that still means that
everything that we promised was
delivered and we are still one of the
biggest if not the biggest donors of
unra and I think this is uh very
important to understand that of course
we are taking those accusations very
serious in Germany but we still stick to
our humanitarian uh or to the
humanitarian cost we are still um well
delivered everything promised to unra
and we're still funding a lot of
humanitarian Aid throughout other
organizations okay I'll get on to the
weapons aspect with Shar in just a
moment first of all John let's just uh
look at the aid aspect so Germany a
strong part of Germany's defense seemed
to be that because they do give a huge
amount of Aid to Palestinians it it kind
of condones the support towards
Israel well I mean the first thing to
say is um that yes it is needs to be
taken very seriously I think it's just a
matter of regret that Germany is being
brought to a court by a country
Nicaragua whose leader Daniel Ortega is
probably one of the worst violators of
human rights of any um leader uh that
won't necessarily affect the way the
court looks at it anybody is able to
bring a case South Africa brought a case
against Israel a month or two ago and
we're going to see more and more of that
as the glob south or middle ground
states are becoming more assertive which
is absolutely their right it is
absolutely true that Germany does give
and and always has given um a
considerable amount of Aid to uh
Palestinians in Gaza in the West Bank um
that said that does not in any way
minimize the question of German's
problems Germany's problems now with
Israel I was I was writing a piece for
The Guardian newspaper only last Friday
I split my time between Germany and and
elsewhere and I have been really quite
struck and depressed by the
inability of public Germany to find a
language that both reconciles theirs on
the whole idea of postwar postn Germany
uh regarding it as a fundamental plank
of its existence and of the reason of
state of Germany to support Israel
alongside legitimate criticism of the
actions of this far-right Netanyahu
government and the inability the fact
that Germany is and the German
government has been so desperate to
close down discussion of that suggests
to me that it hasn't made the progress
that I had always assumed it had in
terms of coming up with an a sympathetic
but objective approach to Israel Tas
what what would your response be to that
because there has been a lot of
silencing of critics of Israel and pro
Palestinian voices since the war on Gaza
began in
Germany well I would first of all argue
that in the very first statement our
foreign minister gave after the
terroristic attack on the 7th of October
um before she flew off to Israel um she
made clear that of course Israel has the
right to defend itself but within the
framework of the international law that
means on the base of international law
it has the right to defend itself but it
also gives the framework and therefore
um all the responsibility Israel has to
take on if it defends itself and I think
this is very important of course I do
understand this is nuanced and this is
to a certain amount um and not what
people might hope for how the suffering
of the Palestinians is seen for the very
first statement I would argue that was
of course the response to the horrific
attacks on the 7th of October and after
that I would say yes it's incredibly
important that we see and we talk about
the inhumane suffering the Palestinians
have to take on um and we have to
discuss it very I don't want to say
carefully but uh in a matter in a
serious matter that
just jump in there because it's not
necessarily talking about the suffering
of the Palestinians it's talking about
the action of the Israelis and the
German government has said that it must
act within the bounds of international
humanitarian law and yet it's
not why is it not um I mean the the the
German government is supplying Aid to
the Palestinians and I would argue that
is definitely within humanitarian
international law um on the other hand
most of the weapon deliveries since the
7th of October the vast majority of it
were were part of of testing of training
or industrial industrial cooperation so
of course I do understand that that we
have delivered weapons uh in the past to
Israel um to defend itself and of course
I do also see that um and I think that
and I mean that is another case in front
of the icj if there and it is up to the
icj to decide decide that if the
use in this war of force of military uh
equipment is in the frame of
international law and of course this
ruling of the icj in this other case is
incredibly important okay well let's
look let's look at those weapons um that
was a crucial part of the icj case
against Germany so let's just have a
listen to what the defense argument was
when it said that the weapons that
Germany sent to Israel were not lethal
if we look at what has actually been
licensed for export to Israel under this
framework since October
2023 we see no artillery shells no
Munitions nearly all experts exports
involve what is known as other military
equipment typically of a subordinate or
defensive nature as a matter of fact
only four weapons War weapons have been
licensed for export since October 2023
three of which concern test or practice
equipment sh let's bring you into the
discussion at this point because you
have contributed to a lengthy report on
Germany's weapons export to Israel so do
you agree with the core of this defense
that Germany made yesterday in
court absolutely not it is unfortunately
very disingenuous this defense by
Germany at the court claimed that the
vast majority of weapons H were not
weapons of war but this is an internal
definition that the German government
has developed in order to whitewash very
deadly weapons that are being sold and
uh those weapons which are defined as
weapons of war where they claim are
mostly weapons for training in fact we
have evidence from the Israeli military
that they've used ammunition and
propellant which are designated for
training in order to kill people in Gaza
H we know that the ship
the warships that Germany has sold to
Israel are used to bomb the Gaza Strip
This is under no circumstances
considered to be self-defense because
Israel does not have the right to defend
itself in occupied territory and does
not have the right to use artillery
against unarmed civilians this is a a
war crime as well as a part of what
accumulates to the crime of
genocide and therefore it is completely
illegal what Germany's doing these
weapons I should say about these
warships Mr B did mentioned that they
were sold before H nevertheless the last
of those warships it's called s six has
been delivered to Israel after October 7
when already it was clear that Israel is
committing a
genocide and in this defense that we've
seen by by Germany in the court we've
seen first of all that they have ignored
the most important statement by by the
lawyers of nicaragu which they said
quite at the beginning the German
a reason of state to stand by the side
of Israel does not signify that Israel
has a right to represent all the Jewish
people H so what we are really seeing
here is a very um cynical abuse of the
memory of the Holocaust in order to
profit from an arms trade and we've seen
so many so much evidence of German uh
deadly weapons whether they call them
weapons of war or not H being used to
kill Palestinians in the Gaza Strip to
kill civilians as Act of Revenge as Act
of genocide and it's simply not
convincing that the German government is
not fully aware of this the information
is out in the open out in public let's
just give toas Tas a chance to respond
there first of all just pick up on
sher's last point was the German
government fully aware of what was being
sent to Israel and used in
Gaza I cannot answer that um of course
we're tracking what or usually we're
tracking what's happening with the
weapons whether they are um applied in
in the framework that is agreed on um
but uh this is uh confidential
information and and of course I cannot
um I I actually don't know how much
that's been the case in in in this in
this um weapon delivery cases whether we
already have those information um
whether we have the reports and of
course certain reports are public
um but of course they need to be
confirmed to um well violate or step out
of greed um um um contracts so okay but
it's fair to assume isn't it that
ammunition being given to Israel is
being used to kill people in the Gaza
Strip as I said um my information is
that all um as and this of course agrees
with what was presented yesterday in the
court is that most of the the vast
majority of what has been delivered was
for training purpose if this is um
applied differently of course that needs
to be looked at but there is no um no no
sure sure um information about that U
that we can act on at the moment okay I
mean as none of us here are lawyers
let's U move away from the the detailed
nuances of that case yesterday and look
at the situation in Germany more broadly
John I want to bring you in and pick up
on something sh said that this support
wholesale support of Israel especially
now the whole government of Israel in
its war on Gaza Sher has called it a
cynical abuse of the memory of the
Holocaust what do you say to
that I sort of there's a German word
which is Y which means yes and no I half
agree with that in the inability I do
not see it as a cynical abuse I see it
as an inab ability to understand and in
some ways going off on on a slightly
different tangent the memories of the
war have also in my view uh confuse
Germany when it comes to defending
Ukraine against Russia the sense of
never against War um which it was a
false conclusion from the second world
war rather than you defend democracy so
Germany in one respect has been too
cautious uh in my view when it comes to
Ukraine and has Le learned the wrong
lessons and as with regards to Israel it
is a fundamental tenant of I mean it is
obvious that Germany is always going to
have a different relationship to Israel
than other countries because of its
history that said it cannot be seen to
be this swamping envelope that precludes
that prevents discussions about what the
Israeli government is doing
and the Netanyahu government and this
particular government which is propped
up by the far right would be considered
a rogue government were it not Israel it
is an extreme government represented by
somebody like Netanyahu who absolutely
belongs to the altright hard right type
of leader that sadly is becoming all too
prevalent around the world and yet
Germany doesn't appear to have the
emotional oxygen if that isn't a mixed
metaphor to to understand how to deal
with this government you have even now
Joe Biden being uh pretty critical
although some regard that is as cynical
because he is he is still supplying
Israel with with weapons you have the
Brits and it's foreign secretary David
Cameron being quite at least
rhetorically tough on Israel the French
are too the Germans are pretty much and
I take the point that beach the foreign
minister has said more but ultimately it
comes down to Olaf Schultz and there's
nothing coming out of the chancellory
that gives any indication that this
German government is anything but
Paralyzed by fear of criticizing Israel
tobas there there is a difference isn't
there between supporting Jews supporting
Israel and supporting this particular
government in Israel because it's not a
government that upholds many of the
Germans values particularly D said the
the values of the green party your party
got a prime minister facing corruption
trials trying to overhaul the Supreme
Court extreme rightwing members of the
government so how does it reconcile how
do you reconcile your wholesale support
for
it um I mean first of all we are
supporting the Israel the the state
state of Israel um and and the right to
exist of Israel that's the
the um and I think this is very
important not only if you watch the
debate within the last few weeks but
also I would really say within the first
within the last few months I would agree
that there has been a period of shock of
shock of the 7th of October and I think
this has been particularly big in
Germany because it was after all all the
day the most Jews have been killed since
the Holocaust and I think that had an
impact on our Memorial culture and many
many people in Germany but after the
first uh shock about that I would argue
that there has been a lot of debate
around the Israeli government um and
within the last few weeks we've been
seeing that um that that of course not
only the fact that it's a right-wing
government but also the question how
they're fighting uh that war and the
problems with how they're fighting that
war is being discussed um more and more
of course also in in in circles where I
argue that have been uh more opposed to
the idea that this uh is a problem
problematic approach but I think it's
very important on the other hand of
course we're still having a debate
around how much um criticism of this
government
or not not how much criticism that's the
wrong way to put it I would rather say
what kind of words to use to criticize
that government and I think there is a
of course very um
nuanced approach on um um what is
perceived uh or what actually is
anti-Semitic and I think there we have a
very strong debate around um and and I
do understand that this uncertain from
from from a certain perspective uh seems
as if we would not discuss uh about how
what's actually happening on the ground
as if we would not discuss about What's
happen Gaza jump in because we are we
are running slightly out of time we
haven't heard much from sh and sure I
apologize for that but just listening to
the way Tobias is speaking he's choosing
his words so carefully and I understand
that this is a very complex subject
within Germany but is it to the point
now where Germany's tied itself up in
knots Tobias does say uh that there is a
lot of debate around the Israeli
government and support for it or
criticism for it or words criticizing it
is there are you feeling that people are
allowed to say what they
feel no absolutely not there is a
culture of censorship H people are being
cancelled every day in Germany and
journalists University professors are
simply not allowed to to speak their
mind including Jewish activist Jewish
Scholars are also silenced every day if
they dare to support Palestinian rights
I think that what Mr belel referred to
in terms of ger German's cult memory
culture of memory has completely failed
because Germany was supposed to be the
first country in the world to recognize
the warning signs hunger Mass starvation
being used as a weapon of War
dehumanizing an entire group of people
these are the signs of genocide but
apparently instead we hear from him when
he says we don't know we'll need to look
into it so basically to say uh all of
this information which is out in the
open reported here on Al Jaz is simply
not known to the German government
because they choose to close their eyes
and it is his party the green party not
ol of Schultz H which has established a
special Committee in order to facilitate
more arms exports to Israel after
October 7 and so this it was the the
responsibility of this committee to
examine whether how these weapons are
being used and in fact it's the Minister
of Foreign Affairs of his party an belok
who consistently opposed a ceasefire and
blocked attempts to promote ceasefire
whether on the UN or the EU level and
promoted more Bloodshed this is I am
very conscious that we are running out
of time and I can see Tobias wanting to
jump in there just to
respond I I first first of all I think
we need to establish that there's still
well more than 100 people uh being taken
hostage and of course they need to be
freed to have a permanent solution on
this War I mean this is what all the
negotiations are about but after all the
humanitarian pause a fire pause was
always or not always but pushed for for
many many months by above all analina
beok and I think the other point is very
important to understand that there is a
problem what's happening on the ground
does not make us complicit and I think
we are addressing that there needs to be
more humanitarian Aid to get into Gaza
that Israel has a responsibility on the
occupied territories to well solve the
humanitarian crisis I think this is very
very important but what I'm saying what
I was saying before what we don't know
is regarding the firearms and the
weapons we delivered our information is
that this was on a vast majority for
training or industrial
purpose okay that sadly we have run out
of time we do have to wrap up our
discussion even though it could go on
for a lot longer I do appreciate you all
taking the time to join us tobas B John
cner and Sh he thank you very
much and thank you too for watching you
can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website that's aljazera for
further discussion do go to our Facebook
Facebook page that's facebook.com/ AJ
insidestory you can also join the
conversation on X our handlers at AJ
insid story from me Laura Kyle and the
whole team here it's bye for
[Music]
now